# MODEL1006230083: Kroll2000_PTH_BoneFormationDesorption

## Installation

Download this repository, and install with distutils

`python setup.py install`

Or, install using pip

`pip install git+https://github.com/biomodels/MODEL1006230083.git`

To install a specific version (in this example, from the 2014-09-16 BioModels release)

`pip install git+https://github.com/biomodels/MODEL1006230083.git@20140916`


# Model Notes


This a model from the article:  
**Parathyroid hormone temporal effects on bone formation and resorption.**   
Kroll MH. _Bull Math Biol_ 2000 Jan;62(1):163-88
[10824426](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10824426) ,  
**Abstract:**   
Parathyroid hormone (PTH) paradoxically causes net bone loss (resorption) when
administered in a continuous fashion, and net bone formation (deposition) when
administered intermittently. Currently no pharmacological formulations are
available to promote bone formation, as needed for the treatment of
osteoporosis. The paradoxical behavior of PTH confuses endocrinologists, thus,
a model bone resorption or deposition dependent on the timing of PTH
administration would de-mystify this behavior and provide the basis for
logical drug formulation. We developed a mathematical model that accounts for
net bone loss with continuous PTH administration and net bone formation with
intermittent PTH administration, based on the differential effects of PTH on
the osteoblastic and osteoclastic populations of cells. Bone, being a major
reservoir of body calcium, is under the hormonal control of PTH. The overall
effect of PTH is to raise plasma levels of calcium, partly through bone
resorption. Osteoclasts resorb bone and liberate calcium, but they lack
receptors for PTH. The preosteoblastic precursors and preosteoblasts possess
receptors for PTH, upon which the hormone induces differentiation from the
precursor to preosteoblast and from the preosteoblast to the osteoblast. The
osteoblasts generate IL-6; IL-6 stimulates preosteoclasts to differentiate
into osteoclasts. We developed a mathematical model for the differentiation of
osteoblastic and osteoclastic populations in bone, using a delay time of 1
hour for differentiation of preosteoblastic precursors into preosteoblasts and
2 hours for the differentiation of preosteoblasts into osteoblasts. The ratio
of the number of osteoblasts to osteoclasts indicates the net effect of PTH on
bone resorption and deposition; the timing of events producing the maximum
ratio would induce net bone deposition. When PTH is pulsed with a frequency of
every hour, the preosteoblastic population rises and decreases in nearly a
symmetric pattern, with 3.9 peaks every 24 hours, and 4.0 peaks every 24 hours
when PTH is administered every 6 hours. Thus, the preosteoblast and osteoblast
frequency depends more on the nearly constant value of the PTH, rather than on
the frequency of the PTH pulsations. Increasing the time delay gradually
increases the mean value for the number of osteoblasts. The osteoblastic
population oscillates for all intermittent administrations of PTH and even
when the PTH infusion is constant. The maximum ratio of osteoblasts to
osteoclasts occurs when PTH is administered in pulses of every 6 hours. The
delay features in the model bear most of the responsibility for the occurrence
of these oscillations, because without the delay and in the presence of
constant PTH infusions, no oscillations occur. However, with a delay, under
constant PTH infusions, the model generates oscillations. The osteoblast
oscillations express limit cycle behavior. Phase plane analysis show simple
and complex attractors. Subsequent to a disturbance in the number of
osteoblasts, the osteoblasts quickly regain their oscillatory behavior and
cycle back to the original attractor, typical of limit cycle behavior.
Further, because the model was constructed with dissipative and nonlinear
features, one would expect ensuing oscillations to show limit cycle behavior.
The results from our model, increased bone deposition with intermittent PTH
administration and increased bone resorption with constant PTH administration,
conforms with experimental observations and with an accepted explanation for
osteoporosis.

This model was taken from the [CellML
repository](http://www.cellml.org/models) and automatically converted to SBML.  
The original model was: [ **Kroll MH. (2000) - version=1.0**
](http://models.cellml.org/exposure/cd3894f2a03affcca553d904576f9208)  
The original CellML model was created by:  
**Catherine Lloyd**   
c.lloyd@auckland.ac.nz  
The University of Auckland  

This model originates from BioModels Database: A Database of Annotated
Published Models (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/biomodels/). It is copyright (c)
2005-2011 The BioModels.net Team.  
To the extent possible under law, all copyright and related or neighbouring
rights to this encoded model have been dedicated to the public domain
worldwide. Please refer to [CC0 Public Domain
Dedication](http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) for more
information.

In summary, you are entitled to use this encoded model in absolutely any
manner you deem suitable, verbatim, or with modification, alone or embedded it
in a larger context, redistribute it, commercially or not, in a restricted way
or not..  
  
To cite BioModels Database, please use: [Li C, Donizelli M, Rodriguez N,
Dharuri H, Endler L, Chelliah V, Li L, He E, Henry A, Stefan MI, Snoep JL,
Hucka M, Le Nov√®re N, Laibe C (2010) BioModels Database: An enhanced, curated
and annotated resource for published quantitative kinetic models. BMC Syst
Biol., 4:92.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20587024)


